Reorg and cleanup of economics section of docs (#14868)
solana-labs/solana: docs/src/transaction_fees.md

---
title: Transaction Fees
---

**Subject to change.**

Each transaction sent through the network, to be processed by the current leader validation-client and confirmed as a global state transaction, contains a transaction fee. Transaction fees offer many benefits in the Solana economic design, for example they:

- provide unit compensation to the validator network for the CPU/GPU resources necessary to process the state transaction,
- reduce network spam by introducing real cost to transactions,
- and provide potential long-term economic stability of the network through a protocol-captured minimum fee amount per transaction, as described below.

> Network consensus votes are sent as normal system transfers, which means that validators pay transaction fees to participate in consensus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Network consensus votes are submitted as transactions, which means that validators pay transaction fees to participate in consensus.
```

> Many current blockchain economies \(e.g. Bitcoin, Ethereum\), rely on protocol-based rewards to support the economy in the short term, with the assumption that the revenue generated through transaction fees will support the economy in the long term, when the protocol derived rewards expire. In an attempt to create a sustainable economy through protocol-based rewards and transaction fees, a fixed portion (initially 50%) of each transaction fee is destroyed, with the remaining fee going to the current leader processing the transaction. A scheduled global inflation rate provides a source for rewards distributed to validation-clients, through the process described above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many current blockchain economies \(e.g. Bitcoin, Ethereum\), rely on protocol-based rewards to support the economy in the short term, with the assumption that the revenue generated through transaction fees will support the economy in the long term, when the protocol derived rewards expire. In an attempt to create a sustainable economy through protocol-based rewards and transaction fees, a fixed portion (50%) of each transaction fee is destroyed, with the remaining fee going to the current leader processing the transaction. A scheduled global inflation rate provides a source for rewards distributed to validation-clients, through the process described above.
```

> Transaction fees are set by the network cluster based on recent historical throughput, see [Congestion Driven Fees](implemented-proposals/transaction-fees.md#congestion-driven-fees). This minimum portion of each transaction fee can be dynamically adjusted depending on historical gas usage. In this way, the protocol can use the minimum fee to target a desired hardware utilization. By monitoring a protocol specified gas usage with respect to a desired, target usage amount, the minimum fee can be raised/lowered which should, in turn, lower/raise the actual gas usage per block until it reaches the target amount. This adjustment process can be thought of as similar to the difficulty adjustment algorithm in the Bitcoin protocol, however in this case it is adjusting the minimum transaction fee to guide the transaction processing hardware usage to a desired level.

Reviewer: Can we call it something other than "gas"?

Author: changed to signatures-per-slot
